<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/xhtml-math11-f.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-US">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=0.4"/>
<meta name="google" content="notranslate" />
<link rel="canonical" href="https://sleef.org/compile.xhtml" />
<link rel="icon" href="favicon.png" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="texlike.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="sleef.css"/>
<title>SLEEF - Compiling and installing the library</title>
</head>
<body translate="no" class="notranslate">
<h1>SLEEF - Compiling and installing the library</h1>

<h2>Table of contents</h2>

<ul class="none" style="font-family: arial, sansserif; padding-left: 0.5cm;">
  <li><a class="underlined" href="index.xhtml">Introduction</a></li>
  <li>&nbsp;</li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="compile.xhtml">Compiling and installing the library</a></li>
    <ul class="disc">
      <li><a href="#preliminaries">Preliminaries</a></li>
      <li><a href="#cmakevars">Common CMake variables</a></li>
      <li><a href="#linux">Compiling and installing the library on Linux</a></li>
      <li><a href="#MSVC">Compiling the library with Microsoft Visual C++</a></li>
      <li><a href="#hello">Compiling and running "Hello SLEEF"</a></li>
      <li><a href="#import">Importing SLEEF into your project</a></li>
      <li><a href="#cross">Cross compilation for iOS and Android</a></li>
    </ul>
  <li>&nbsp;</li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="purec.xhtml">Math library reference</a></li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="quad.xhtml"> Quad-precision math library reference</a></li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="dft.xhtml">DFT library reference</a></li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="misc.xhtml">Other tools included in the package</a></li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="benchmark.xhtml">Benchmark results</a></li>
  <li><a class="underlined" href="additional.xhtml">Additional notes</a></li>
</ul>

<h2 id="preliminaries">Preliminaries</h2>

<p class="noindent">
In order to build SLEEF, you need <a class="underlined"
href="http://www.cmake.org/">CMake</a>, which is an open-source and
cross-platform building tool. In order to test the library, it is
better to have <a class="underlined" href="http://www.mpfr.org/">the
GNU MPFR Library</a>, <a class="underlined"
href="https://wiki.openssl.org/index.php/Libssl_API">Libssl</a> and
<a class="underlined" href="http://www.fftw.org/">FFTW</a>.
</p>

<p>
CMake works by allowing the developer to specify build parameters and
rules in a simple text file that cmake then processes to generate
project files for the actual native build tools (e.g. UNIX Makefiles,
Microsoft Visual Studio, Apple XCode, etc). If you are not already
familiar with cmake, please refer to the
<a class="underlined" href="https://cmake.org/documentation/">official documentation</a>
or
the <a class="underlined" href="https://gitlab.kitware.com/cmake/community/-/wikis/home">basic
introductions in the wiki</a>.
</p>

<h2>Quick start</h2>

<p class="noindent">
You will find quick start instructions in the sources or via GitHub in the
<a class="underlined" href="https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/blob/master/README.md">README.md</a>
file.
</p>

<h2 id="linux">Compiling and installing the library on Linux</h2>

<p class="noindent">
  In order to build the library, you need to install OpenMP. In order
  to test the library, you need to install libmpfr, libssl and
  libfftw3. Availability of these libraries are checked upon execution
  of cmake. Please change the directory to sleef-3.X and run the
  following commands.

  <pre class="command">$ sudo apt-get install libmpfr-dev libssl-dev libfftw3-dev
$ cmake -S . -B build/ ..
$ cmake --build build/ --clean-first -j
$ ctest --test-dir build/ -j
$ sudo cmake --install build/ --prefix /path/to/install/dir
  </pre>
</p>

<br/>

<p>
  In order to uninstall the libraries and headers, run the following command.
</p>

<pre class="command" style="margin-top: 1em;">$ sudo xargs rm -v &lt; install_manifest.txt</pre>

<h3 id="lto">Building the library with LTO support</h3>

<p>
  You can build the library with <a class="underlined"
  href="additional.xhtml#lto">link time opimization(LTO)</a> support
  with the following commands. Note that you can only build static
  libraries with LTO support. You also have to use the same compiler
  with the same version to build the library and other source codes.
</p>

<pre class="command">$ CC=gcc cmake -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=FALSE -DSLEEF_ENABLE_LTO=TRUE ..</pre>

<p>
  In order to build the library with thinLTO support with clang, you
  need to specify LLVM AR command that exactly corresponds to the
  clang compiler.
</p>

<pre class="command">$ CC=clang-9 cmake -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=FALSE -DSLEEF_ENABLE_LTO=TRUE -DSLEEF_LLVM_AR_COMMAND=llvm-ar-9 ..</pre>


<h3 id="inline">Building the header files for inlining the whole SLEEF functions</h3>

<p>
  <a class="underlined" href="additional.xhtml#inline">Header files
  for inlining the whole SLEEF functions</a> can be built with the
  following commands. With these header files, it may be easier to
  inline the whole SLEEF functions than using LTO. You have to specify
  "-ffp-contract=off" compiler option when compiling a source code
  that includes one of these header files.
</p>

<pre class="command">$ cmake -DSLEEF_BUILD_INLINE_HEADERS=TRUE ..</pre>

<h2 id="MSVC">Compiling the library with Microsoft Visual C++</h2>

<p class="noindent">
  You need Visual Studio 2019. Open developer command prompt for
  VS2019 and change directory to sleef-3.X. When configuring a build
  with cmake, you need to use a specific generator: `cmake -G"Visual
  Studio 16 2019" ..` This generator will create a proper solution
  `SLEEF.sln` under the build directory. You can still use `cmake
  --build .` to build the library without opening Visual Studio.
</p>

<p>
  Below is an example of commands for building SLEEF with Visual
  Studio.
</p>

<pre class="command">D:\sleef-3.X> mkdir build
D:\sleef-3.X> cd build
D:\sleef-3.X\build> cmake -G"Visual Studio 15 2017 Win64" ..    &amp;:: If you are using VS2017
D:\sleef-3.X\build> cmake -G"Visual Studio 16 2019" ..          &amp;:: If you are using VS2019
D:\sleef-3.X\build> cmake --build . --config Release -- /maxcpucount:1</pre>


<h3 id="cow">Compiling the library with Clang on Windows</h3>

<p class="noindent">
  You need Visual Studio 2019. Install ninja via VS2019 installer.
  Download and install clang on Windows from <a class="underlined"
  href="https://releases.llvm.org/download.html">llvm.org</a>. Below
  is an example of commands for building SLEEF with Clang on Windows.
</p>

<pre class="command">D:\sleef-3.X> "c:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvars64.bat"
D:\sleef-3.X> cmake -S . -B build -GNinja -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER:PATH="C:\Program Files\LLVM\bin\clang.exe" ..
D:\sleef-3.X> cmake --build build --clean-first</pre>


<h2 id="hello">Compiling and running "Hello SLEEF"</h2>

<p class="noindent">
  Now, let's try compiling the <a class="underlined"
  href="hellox86.c">source code shown in Fig. 2.1</a>.
</p>

<pre class="code">
<code>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;</code>
<code>#include &lt;x86intrin.h&gt;</code>
<code>#include &lt;sleef.h&gt;</code>
<code></code>
<code>int main(int argc, char **argv) {</code>
<code>  double a[] = {2, 10};</code>
<code>  double b[] = {3, 20};</code>
<code></code>
<code>  __m128d va, vb, vc;</code>
<code>  </code>
<code>  va = _mm_loadu_pd(a);</code>
<code>  vb = _mm_loadu_pd(b);</code>
<code></code>
<code>  vc = Sleef_powd2_u10(va, vb);</code>
<code></code>
<code>  double c[2];</code>
<code></code>
<code>  _mm_storeu_pd(c, vc);</code>
<code></code>
<code>  printf("pow(%g, %g) = %g\n", a[0], b[0], c[0]);</code>
<code>  printf("pow(%g, %g) = %g\n", a[1], b[1], c[1]);</code>
<code>}</code>
</pre>
<p style="text-align:center;">
  Fig. 2.1: <a href="hellox86.c">Source code for testing</a>
</p>



<p style="margin-top: 2cm;">
  Fig.2.2 shows typical commands for compiling and executing the hello
  code on Linux computers.
</p>

<pre class="command" style="margin-top: 2.0em; margin-bottom: 0.5cm;">$ gcc hellox86.c -o hellox86 -lsleef
$ ./hellox86
pow(2, 3) = 8
pow(10, 20) = 1e+20
$ &block;</pre>
<p style="text-align:center;">
  Fig. 2.2: Commands for compiling and executing hellox86.c
</p>

<p style="margin-top: 2cm;">
  You may need to set LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable
  appropriately. If you are trying to execute the program on Mac OSX
  or Windows, try copying the DLLs to the current directory.
</p>

<h2 id="import">Importing SLEEF into your project</h2>


<p class="noindent">
  Below is an example <a class="underlined"
  href="CMakeLists.txt">CMakeLists.txt</a> for compiling the above
  hellox86.c. CMake will automatically download SLEEF from GitHub
  repository, and thus there is no need to include SLEEF in your
  software package. If you prefer importing SLEEF as a submodule in
  git, you can use SOURCE_DIR option instead of GIT_REPOSITORY option
  for ExternalProject_Add.
</p>

<pre class="code">
<code>cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.5.1)</code>
<code>include(ExternalProject)</code>
<code>find_package(Git REQUIRED)</code>
<code></code>
<code>ExternalProject_Add(libsleef</code>
<code>  GIT_REPOSITORY https://github.com/shibatch/sleef</code>
<code>  CMAKE_ARGS -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/contrib</code>
<code>)</code>
<code></code>
<code>include_directories(${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/contrib/include)</code>
<code>link_directories(${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/contrib/lib)</code>
<code></code>
<code>add_executable(hellox86 hellox86.c)</code>
<code>add_dependencies(hellox86 libsleef)</code>
<code>target_link_libraries(hellox86 sleef)</code>
</pre>
<p style="text-align:center;">
  Fig. 2.3: <a href="CMakeLists.txt">Example CMakeLists.txt</a>
</p>


<h2 id="cross">Cross compilation for iOS and Android</h2>

<p class="noindent">
  SLEEF has preliminary support for iOS and Android. Here,
  "preliminary" means that the library is only tested to be built, but
  not tested to work correctly on the real devices. In order to cross
  compile the library, you need a cmake tool chain file for the
  corresponding OS. The tool chain file for iOS can be downloaded
  from <a class="underlined"
  href="https://github.com/leetal/ios-cmake">https://github.com/leetal/ios-cmake</a>.
  The tool chain file for Android is included in the SDK. You first
  need to build the library for the host computer, then for the target
  OS. Below is an example sequence of commands for cross compiling the
  library for iOS.
</p>

<pre class="command" style="margin-top: 2.0em; margin-bottom: 0.5cm;">$ mkdir build-native
$ cd build-native
$ cmake -GNinja ..
$ ninja
$ cd ..
$ mkdir build-cross
$ cd build-cross
$ cmake -GNinja -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=../ios.toolchain.cmake -DNATIVE_BUILD_DIR=`pwd`/../build-native -DSLEEF_DISABLE_MPFR=TRUE -DSLEEF_DISABLE_SSL=TRUE ..
$ ninja
</pre>

<p>
Below is an example sequence of commands for cross compiling the library for Android.
</p>

<pre class="command" style="margin-top: 2.0em; margin-bottom: 0.5cm;">$ mkdir build-native
$ cd build-native
$ cmake -GNinja ..
$ ninja
$ cd ..
$ mkdir build-cross
$ cd build-cross
$ cmake -GNinja -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=/opt/android-ndk-r21d/build/cmake/android.toolchain.cmake -DNATIVE_BUILD_DIR=`pwd`/../build-native -DANDROID_ABI=arm64-v8a ..
$ ninja
</pre>

<p class="footer">
  Copyright &copy; 2010-2024 SLEEF Project, Naoki Shibata and contributors.<br/>
  SLEEF is open-source software and is distributed under the Boost Software License, Version 1.0.
</p>

<script type="text/javascript">
//<![CDATA[
var sc_project=11391936;
var sc_invisible=1;
var sc_security="fa400da8";
//]]>
</script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="https://www.statcounter.com/counter/counter_xhtml.js"></script>


</body>
</html>
